
# Lights

A light model describes how light is emitted in the different directions of the space. 
It takes as input the position of a point $x$ of an object and it returns two elements: 

- a vector that represents the direction of the light **received** (as convention the sign is chosen to make the ray pointing toward the light source) $(d_x, d_y, d_z)$
- the intensity of light received by point $x$ for every wavelength $(l_R, l_G, l_B)$

The three basic direct light models are:

- Direct light 
- Point light 
- Spot light


### Direct light 

Directional lights are used to model distant sources, so that they uniformly influence the entire scene.
The rendering equation reduces to:

$$L\left(x, \omega_r\right)=\boldsymbol{l} * f_r\left(x, \boldsymbol{d}, \omega_r\right)$$

### Point light

The position $\boldsymbol{p}=\left(p_x, p_y, p_z\right)$ and the color $\boldsymbol{l}=\left(l_R, l_G, l_B\right)$ characterize a point light.

$$\begin{array}{l}
L\left(x, \omega_r\right)=\sum_l L(l, \overrightarrow{l x}) f_r\left(x, \overrightarrow{l x}, \omega_r\right) \\
L(l, \vec{x})=\boldsymbol{l}\left(\frac{g}{|\boldsymbol{p}-\boldsymbol{x}|}\right)^\beta \end{array}$$

````glsl
vec3 lightDir = lightPos - fragPos;  
vec3 lightColor = lightColor.rgb * pow(g/length(lightDir), beta);
````

Note that the light direction is normalized to make it an unitary vector:
$$\overrightarrow{l x}=\frac{p-x}{|\boldsymbol{p}-\boldsymbol{x}|}$$
Also note that we write $p - x$ because the ray is oriented from the object to the light source, as for the direct light case.
So at the end: 

$$L\left(x, \omega_r\right)=\boldsymbol{l}\left(\frac{g}{|\boldsymbol{p}-\boldsymbol{x}|}\right)^\beta * f_r\left(x, \frac{\boldsymbol{p}-\boldsymbol{x}}{|\boldsymbol{p}-\boldsymbol{x}|}, \omega_r\right)$$

The decay factor $\beta$ is either constant, inverse-linear or inverse-squared. 


### Spot light 

Spot lights are characterized by two angles $\alpha _{IN}$ and $\alpha _{OUT}$ that divide the illuminated area into three zones: constant $\alpha _{IN}$, decay (between $\alpha _{IN}$ and $\alpha _{OUT}$) and absent (outside $\alpha _{OUT}$). 
Spot lights are implemented by confining other light sources with the dimming term: 

$$L(l, \overrightarrow{l x})=L_0(l, \overrightarrow{l x}) \cdot \operatorname{clamp}\left(\frac{\frac{\boldsymbol{p}-\boldsymbol{x}}{|\boldsymbol{p}-\boldsymbol{x}|} \cdot \boldsymbol{d}-c_{O U T}}{c_{I N}-c_{O U T}}\right)$$

$$L(l, \overrightarrow{l x})=\boldsymbol{l}\left(\frac{g}{|\boldsymbol{p}-\boldsymbol{x}|}\right)^\beta \cdot \operatorname{clamp}\left(\frac{\frac{\boldsymbol{p}-\boldsymbol{x}}{|\boldsymbol{p}-\boldsymbol{x}|} \cdot \boldsymbol{d}-c_{O U T}}{c_{I N}-c_{O U T}}\right)$$


where $\operatorname{clamp}(y)=\left\{\begin{array}{cc}0 & y<0 \\ y & y \in[0,1] \\ 1 & y>1\end{array}\right.$ 


````glsl
vec3 lightDir = lightPos - fragPos;  
float dimmingTerm = clamp(( dot(normalize(lightDir),lightDir) - cosout)/(cosin - cosout), 0.0f, 1.0f);  
float light = pow(g/length(lightDir), beta);  
vec3 lightColor = lightColor.rgb * light * dimmingTerm;
````

### Ambient light

Ambient lighting is the simplest approximation for indirect illumination which is caused by lights that bounces from other objects. A slight extension of ambient lighting is the **hemispheric lighting** whcih simulates a "sky/ground" model using two ambient light colors (the “upper” or “sky” color, and the “lower” or “ground” color) and a direction vector. The technique creates an ambient light color factor by “blending” the two colors, with respect to the orientation of the object.

### HDRI maps

The "evolution" to the hemispheric lightning is to have a function that return the color received by any point $x_i$ (of any objected). Each point is thus illuminated according the function. These functions can be computed either from specially taken pictures or from high quality off-line rendering of the environment (hdri maps). 
