
Now the question becomes: suppose that we estimated $\theta^N$ , with $N$ samples of data and that the real data generator has $\theta ^O$ parameters. 

$$J_N(\vartheta)\xrightarrow[N\to\infty]{}[\bar{J}(\vartheta)=\mathbf{E}[\varepsilon_\vartheta(t)^2]$$

It can be easily seen, since $\bar{R} > 0$ that the minimum of $\bar{J}(\vartheta)$ is reached for $\vartheta=\vartheta^{\circ}.$ 
This implies that in such a situation

$$\min\{J_N(\vartheta)\}\xrightarrow[N\to\infty]{}\min\{\bar{J}(\vartheta)\}$$

Asymptotically we will converge to the minimum of the asymptotic cost. 

$\theta ^o$ is "the description of the real system" 

$$\theta^{o} \in \Delta$$

Prediction error minimization guarantees that $M(\hat \theta _N) \xrightarrow[n \rightarrow \infty]{} S$ 

The theorem consists in prove that the minimum of the asymptotic cost (which is guarantee to converge to) corresponds to the set of parameters that describe the real system. 

$$\hat \theta _N \xrightarrow[N\to\infty]{} \theta ^ o$$


This theorem is very, very significant. 
If the system that you want to model and learn from data is inside the model set, if you minimize the **variance of the prediction error**, asymptotically so with a large data set, you will converge exactly to that system. 

So it means that the prediction error algorithm that we are using in this course is actually good, meaning that they will lead you to the right model (at least in this very ideal case where the system is in the model set). 





The system is in the selected family of models and $\bar{J}$ has a unique minimum. In this case, as $N\to\infty$ we have that $\hat{\vartheta}_N\to\vartheta^\circ$
 
 The system is in the selected family of models and $\bar{J}$ has a set of minimum values $\Delta$. In this case, as $N\to\infty$ we have that $\hat{\vartheta}_N$ tends to one of the values in $\Delta$. 
 
 
The system is not in the selected family of models and $\bar{J}$ has a unique minimum. In this case the model with $\hat{\vartheta}_N$ is the best proxy of the true system in the selected family.

The system is not in the selected family of models and $\bar{J} has a set of minimum values $\Delta$. In this case the model with $\hat{\vartheta}_N$ tends to one of the best proxies of the true system in the selected family.