
# Constraints Satisfaction Problem (CSP)

Some problems could be classified as CSP when we can define these elements:

- A set of variables $X_1 ... X_n$
-  For each variable $X_i$ we associate a domain $X_i$ = set of values that $X_i$ can assume 
- The set of constraints $C_1 ... C_n$ which specifies allowable combinations of values. The constaints can be:
	- unary (they involve only one variable),
	- binary (they involve two variables)
	- n-nary It's proved that any n-nary constraint can be turned into a set of binary constraints.

#### Constraint propagation.
We use constraints in order to reduce the number of legal values for a variable, which in turn can reduce the legal values for another variable, and so on. 

- 1-consistency (node-consistency): that is based basically on the domains of variables. 
- 2-consistency (**Arc-consistency**): the one we will check using the **AC-3** algorithm. $X_i \rightarrow X_j$ is arc consistency if for each value of $X_i$ exists a value in $X_j$ .
- Path-consistency: extension of the previous to more variables

AC-3 arc consistency algorithm that can be applied only to all CSPs formulated with binary constraints. The algorithm is very intuitive and simple. 

## CSP as Search Problem

An important behavour of the CSPs is that they are commutative! 
This reduces a lot the branching factor on our trees when we try to perform a search tree to solve this kind of problems. 
With this consideration with ended up we can perform a depth search tree giving possible values from the domain to the variables.
Also we could perform the DFS with some variants: 

- **Backtracking**
 
- **Forward Checking**: using **AC-3** each time a variable is assigned. For each variable not assigned that involves X (which is just assigned) is checked the **arc-consistency**. 

- **MRV (Minimum Remaing Values)**: When we try to assign a value to a variable we follow a policy to choose which variables assign and not just take a random one. So we choose the variable with minimum 'legal' values in the domain. 
- **LCV (Least Constraints Value)** : the MRV policy interest the variable choosen for the next assigment. The LCV policy tells us which value assign to the variable: we choose the value that is involved in the less numbe of constraints with other values. 


