
# Introduction 

It's a lot social engineering:

> "People are the weakest element in a security chain. While technology vulnerabilities are patched, there is no patch for human stupidity."

The attacker always takes the **path with least resistance**. 


## CIA paradigm

- **Confidentiality**: information can be accessed only by authorized entities, unauthorized people can not have access to it (can be seen as privacy). 
- **Integrity**: consistency and trustworthiness of information over its entire lifecycle
- **Availability**: information must be available to all the authorized parties without external constraints

Other definitions:

- **Vulnerability**: elements that let someone break the rules of the CIA paradigm.
- **Exploit**: method of using one or several vulnerabilities to achieve a certain goal that breaches certain constraints.
- **Asset**: Recognizes the value that someone or an organization places on a particular entity.
- **Threat**: This is a possible violation of the CIA.
- **Threat Agent**: The person or thing that may instigate an attack.
- **Attacker**: The person or thing that executes the attack. 
- **Hacker**: An individual with an intricate knowledge of computers and computer networks, and a desire to learn everything.
- **Security Level**: something which addresses the threats directed towards the asset.
- **Protection Level**: security measures put in place to safeguard an asset.
- **Risk**: $Risk = Asset * Vulnerabilities * Threats$

> "A system with limited vulnerabilities but with a high threat level may be less secure than a system with many vulnerabilities but with low threat level."



